1. Use Lifecycle Rules to Save Costs
      Transition data to cheaper storage like:
      
      S3 Standard-IA (for infrequent access, minimum 30-day storage)
      
      S3 One Zone-IA (cheaper but less durable)
    
      S3 Glacier / Deep Archive (for long-term archival)
      
      Example:
      
      After 30 days, move to Standard-IA
      
      After 90 days, move to Glacier
      
      After 365 days, delete

2. Organize with Prefixes or Tags
      Apply rules by prefix (e.g., logs/, images/) or object tags (e.g., {"archive": "true"}).
      
      Tags give more flexibility when objects span multiple prefixes or don't follow naming conventions.

3. Enable Expiration for Cleanup
      Automatically delete old versions or incomplete multipart uploads.
      
      Useful for temporary files, logs, or compliance-based cleanup.
      
      Helps control storage growth.
      
4. Test with a Limited Scope First
      Apply lifecycle rules to specific prefixes/tags before expanding.
      
      Monitor changes via CloudTrail or Storage Lens to ensure they behave as expected.

5. Combine with S3 Storage Lens
        Use S3 Storage Lens to analyze usage and find candidates for lifecycle rules.
        
        Look for:
        
        Infrequently accessed data
        
        Old versions
        
        Buckets growing rapidly

6. Monitor and Log
        Enable S3 Access Logs or CloudTrail Data Events for auditing access and changes.
        
        Monitor object age and transitions with AWS CloudWatch Metrics.

7. Clean Up Noncurrent Versions
        If versioning is enabled, use rules to:
        
        Expire noncurrent versions after a set number of days
        
        Limit the number of retained noncurrent versions


8. Be Cautious with Deletes
        Deletion is irreversible—use object lock or MFA Delete if you need extra protection.
        
        Avoid setting overly aggressive expiration without safeguards.

🧾 Example JSON Lifecycle Policy
json

{
  "Rules": [
    {
      "ID": "TransitionAndExpireLogs",
      "Prefix": "logs/",
      "Status": "Enabled",
      "Transitions": [
        {
          "Days": 30,
          "StorageClass": "STANDARD_IA"
        },
        {
          "Days": 90,
          "StorageClass": "GLACIER"
        }
      ],
      "Expiration": {
        "Days": 365
      }
    }
  ]
}
]



 Main Reasons to Use S3 Lifecycle Rules
      1. Save Storage Costs
            Automatically move data to cheaper storage classes (like S3 Glacier or S3 Standard-IA) as it becomes older or less frequently accessed.
            
            Example: Logs or backups that are rarely read after 30 days.

      2. Automate Cleanup
            Automatically delete old, unused, or temporary files to keep your bucket clean and reduce clutter.
            
            Example: Expire files older than 365 days or delete incomplete multipart uploads.

      3. Manage Object Versions
            If versioning is enabled, it can delete noncurrent versions after a period, preventing unnecessary storage usage.

      4. Data Lifecycle Compliance
            Helps meet regulatory or business data retention policies.
            
            Example: Keep files for 1 year, then delete or archive.

      5. Reduce Manual Effort
            Once rules are set, AWS handles transitions/deletions automatically—no manual tasks or scripts needed.

            
